Assembler programming is different from programming in higher-level languages because in Assembler, we're writing machine instructions.
That means that the Assembler programmer that's us, needs to know a lot more about how the computer itself works.
In this unit, we'll look at the IBM z/Architecture.
That's the rules and methods that an IBM z mainframe uses to process data and instructions.
We won't be covering all aspects of the architecture only what's necessary to start coding Assembler application programs.
Here's how we're going to tackle this.
We'll start out with the main components of a z/Architecture computer which an Assembler program interacts with.
That includes the memory, central processing unit or CPU, the Program Status Word, registers, and instructions.
So let's jump right into memory.
In IBM z/Architecture, memory, which is often referred to as storage, is organized into eight bit units called bytes.
Eight bits makes up a byte that's byte with a y not an I just in case the closed captioning doesn't reflect that.
Both data and instructions are stored in bytes, in memory.
And as the number of bytes it starts adding up, they can be referred to as kilobytes and megabytes and gigabytes and so on.
So it does spell it all out.
These are the powers of two units widely used in computing.
Two to the tenth bytes is a kilobyte, able to represent up to 1024 in decimal.
Two to the 20th is a megabyte, two to the 30th is a gigabyte, and so on all the way up to exabytes, which can represent an absolutely enormous value.
Between those values, there are some other values that come up quite frequently in the IBM z/Architecture, and they're listed here and they include two to the 15th, that's 32 KB, two to the 16th, that's 64 KB, two to the 24th, 16 MB.
And we'll also see 2 GB, 4 GB, 4 exabytes, and 16 exabytes.
The meanings of those specific values will start to become a lot more evident as we progress through this course.
I just wanted to spell out these things because they don't always fall neatly on those multiples of ten power boundaries.
Here we see a few bits making up a byte.
Bits are numbered zero through seven, starting with the leftmost or the most significant digit, and then going towards the lesser significant digits on the right.
Well, sometimes call these the higher-order bits on the left and the lower order bits on the right.
This might seem either obvious or counter-intuitive, and not all architectures look at numbers the same way.
Some other computers go right to left, but we'll be going left to right.
When we're evaluating binary digits in memory, a byte can hold 256 different possible combinations.
Eight bits means 256 possible combinations of ones and zeros in there.
Another way of looking at this is that it can hold from hexadecimal Zero Zero to hexadecimal Fox Fox.
Certain byte values represent characters like capital A, capital W, the character five, asterisk, ampersand, most characters you can type or might want to represent.
By default, z/Architecture uses the EBCDIC encoding, that's EBCDIC, to represent characters.
It also supports ASCII, but you'll mostly be seeing it used for EBCDIC here.
And if you're curious, that's an acronym for Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code.
So yeah, that means if we're looking at some EBCDIC data stored in hex, we can translate the hexadecimal number, The representing numbers and letters by using this table right here, e.g. A, B, C: those are C1 through C9.
So the characters A, B, C, represented in hex, would be Charlie One, Charlie Two, Charlie Three.
Now, I can hear some of you saying, I don't get it.
I thought hexadecimal went up to F.
Why, all of a sudden, do we need two hex characters to say what we could do with just one.
Well, we need to make the distinction between the value of A, which represents 1010 in binary, and the letter A, which represents the first letter in the word Apple, because those are two entirely different things.
In fact, once we get to the second letter in Apple, we've run headfirst into the need for coded characters, along with values.
Some other characters besides letters and numbers you might want to know are: 40, that's the space.
Five Charlie, that's the asterisk.
61 is the forward slash.
So if you're looking at EBCDIC data and come across 615 Charlie, that's a forward slash asterisk, sometimes called a slash splat, which usually signals the start of a comment.
Though not always.
I mentioned that we can also work in ASCII and this is not typical.
Here it is.
30 through 39 represents the numbers.
41 through 5A for uppercase characters, 61 through Seven, Able for lowercase.
So uppercase A, B, C would be 414243.
And for ASCII characters, here's how they get encoded.
Notice how byte's interpretation depends on the system we use.
Remember how a space was hex 40 in EBCDIC? In ASCII, it's hex 20.
I've seen it happen a few times where a programmer was trying to read some data and got back some truly bizarre values, couldn't make sense of it, but could verify that they were looking at the right data in the right location.
It turns out they assumed it was EBCDIC, but the data loaded in there was actually ASCII.
Happens to the best of us.
What is the meaning of a byte? I'm not getting philosophical.
This is actually quite practical here.
The meaning of a byte really depends on how it's used.
E.g., two bytes containing hexadecimal 605 Charlie can be interpreted as a positive 24,668, if we interpret it as a halfword binary integer, or, a dash asterisk, if we assume it's EBCDIC, a back tick backslash, if we assume it's ASCII.
And, if we see it as a packed decimal, something we'll talk about later, it would be a positive 605.
And remember when we said that bytes can be used to represent data and instructions? It could also be interpreted as the instruction to store a floating point register into memory.
Or if we see Fox One, Fox Zero EBCDIC, That's 10.
As a binary halfword, it would be a negative 3,600.
So if we really mean ten and not the characters one, followed by zero, we must first convert them into a binary integer, ten or 000A.
We'll get into this in much greater detail later on.
If you're not new to programming, you've probably run into a situation where you tried to take some input and do some math with it.
And the language got angry saying that it expected an integer.
And you're like, well that is an integer.
But it doesn't know that because it's just interpreting it as a character representation, not the numerical value.
That's what we're trying to avoid here.
Bytes in memory are arranged so that each byte is individually numbered, starting at zero.
The number associated with each byte is called the memory address, or simply the address.
Memory can be thought of as a string of bytes.
And note that only bytes have addresses.
The bits within a byte do not have their own addresses.
I realize I'm reading straight off the slide here, but if you have the time, it might be worth pausing here and looking at these four statements and thinking about what they mean because they really form the foundation of a lot of what we're going to get into.
So just look at these and make sure you're clear on this before moving on.
A lot of what we get into depends on this.
With that in mind, this is how memory appears conceptually to an Assembler program.
Each byte has its own address starting at zero.
And as we increment the address that lands us at the next byte.
And those bytes are almost always expressed in hexadecimal.
We will group these bytes into, well, groups of bytes.
Groups of bytes.
When there's two bytes, that's a halfword.
Four bytes is a word, a is a doubleword, 16 is a quad word.
It's important once again to mention that the address starts on the leftmost byte.
So if you have a fullword stored at A00, A01, A02, A03 (4 bytes), the address for the fullword is A00.
Are Able Zero Zero because that's the leftmost byte.
Some instructions will require that the group address is a multiple of its size in bytes.
E.g., if we're working with a fullword, which is made up of four bytes, it will need to start at an address which is a multiple of four.
When we do this, the group is said to be aligned.
I'm realized, I'm hitting this button quite a bit, but the reasoning for this will become quite evident later on.
You just have to trust me here.
Here's what an example of a line groups might look like.
Notice that the quadword can only start at a zero if we want it to be aligned.
But a doubleword can start at Eight Able Zero or Eight Able Eight, or any other address ending with zero or eight.
And that pattern continues for the fullword and the halfword.
We don't just store data in memory.
We also store programs, instructions.
This is part of the architecture which is based on the first modern computer architecture.
Which all modern computer architectures are based off of known as the Von Neumann architecture.
John Von Neumann was a mathematician at the Institute of Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey.
Go New Jersey.
He and his team were tasked with designing a system where programs and data could be processed as some sort of computing device.
That means we've got instructions and data stored all throughout memory.
How do you keep that straight? I'm so glad you asked, but we'll have to wait until the next section about the CPU to find out.