The central processing unit or CPU, is literally the computer, as in it's the thing that does the computing.
It's the component that executes program instructions.
In addition to executing program instructions, it also has these things called registers and we'll talk about those in a little bit.
But registers are a very fast form of memory.
The CPU's registers are the Program Status Word or the PSW, which is used to control program execution.
and then general registers which can be used for arithmetic and logical operations, as well as to hold the addresses of data and instructions.
There's also floating point registers, control registers, access registers, vector registers.
We won't touch on a lot of those in this course.
But once you're done covering the fundamentals, you'll be able to go back and just add those on top of your fundamental knowledge pretty easily.
We just don't want to hit you with too much early on when you're trying to learn those fundamentals, that whole learning curve thing.
Let's start with those general purpose registers and then we'll get to the PSW.
There are 16 general registers, Zero through Fox in hex.
And usually, instead of saying register eight or register nine, we're going to save ourselves some space and syllables and just say R1, R2, R8, R15, etc.
So again, even though their addresses are in hex and they're 16 of them will usually refer to them in decimal.
And each general register is 64 bits in length.
Registers look like this.
Graphically.
I mean.
This is a 64-bit register, and here it is partitioned into 2 32-bit parts.
So we've got this really fast memory.
What's it for? Two things, primarily.
First, arithmetic and logical operations, since registers can contain binary integers for arithmetic calculations, or bit strings for logical operations, but also holding addresses of data and instructions.
And yeah, you know what I'm gonna say? We're gonna see a lot more of that in just a little bit.
Onto that PSW.
The PSW has lots and lots of fields.
But fortunately, at least for right now, we only need to know about three of them.
And that's the Instruction Address, the Condition Code and the Program Mask.
Most important for us right now is the IA, the Instruction Address, the PSW is a 128 bit register.
The last half of those 128 bits is the instruction address, the IA.
The PSW always has the address of the next instruction to be executed by the CPU.
That's what defines the content of the memory location as an instruction.
By that, I mean, if we print or display characters in memory, there'll be treated as characters.
If we try to add or subtract, will be treated as numbers.
If we point the CPU to them by way of the PSW, it will try to execute them as instructions.
And the way a CPU executes instructions is: first the memory address of the first instruction to be executed is placed in the PSW.
Then the instruction the PSW is pointing to is retrieved from memory by the CPU.
Then the PSW is updated to point to the next instruction in memory.
Then step four, the retrieved instruction is executed.
After that, if the retrieved instruction didn't cause a branch or a go-to, we go back to step two and repeat.
The CPU, retrieves the instruction pointed to by the PSW and the CPU just moves sequentially to the next instruction, which is what it normally does.
If we're branching somewhere in our program, then the address we're branching to goes into the PSW.
We just made a big leap in our understanding right here.
I don't want to make sure we all appreciate this.
We're talking about the CPU actually processing instructions, but it's very likely that you're feeling like we miss something here.
Like how did that program get there in the first place? What makes it stop? What do these instructions even look like? Well, an instruction, at least in memory, might look something like this.
It starts out with an operation code that's the operation to be performed and it's sometimes shortened to just opcode.
Examples of an operation code might be Branch, Add or Multiply.
And the second part is the operand or operands if there's more than one.
This is what the operation is acting on, almost like a subject predicate relationship in a sentence.
So if we were to say "Branch to Calculate_Tax", the "Calculate_Tax" part is the operand (there's one).
And "Add Tax to Register 3", Add is the operation and the bytes at a field called Tax and Register 3 are the two operands in there.
Same with "Subtract Debit from Balance".
Just looking at this, you should be pretty comfortable with spotting the operation, the operands in there.
Next, we'll take a look at just what these look like in the computer's memory.
Branch is just one operation and one operand, so it looks like this.
"Add Tax to Register 3", we've got two operands and notice that order, more on that later.
Same with the third example except it's not using a register, so it's got two addresses listed in there.
How do we encode an operand's address? The most obvious is just putting the address right in there, the actual address.
Problem with that is that IBM z/Architecture does 64-bit addressing, that's eight bytes.
That can get pretty long.
This might have been an option on some earlier systems where there was not a lot of memory to go around, but it is certainly not on modern systems.
We've run into another issue with program relocation.
The program tells us to branch to Calc_Tax, which is at 2 Able 080.
And Calc_Tax references the Tax field at 2 Able 0 Charlie 0.
These result in some large instructions, but they should still work, but programs don't always run at the same address, do they? What happens if the program is moved? If the program were to run starting at address 78000, we'd have to update all of these addresses and that's too much work, assuming our actual program is more than three lines of code.
To address this, and yes, that was a very clever pun, thank you for noticing.
To address this, we use something called offsets.
By using offsets instead of hard coded addresses, we can address anything regardless of where the program actually starts in memory.
Notice how we're running this at 2 Able 000.
Well, the offset starts at 000 and we simply work with the relative offset.
And now we don't have to worry about representing the actual address.
IBM z/Architecture computers use offsets for addressing operands and this mechanism is known as base-displacement.
Get ready to see that a whole lot.
It consists of using registers to point to an address called a base.
And then we use offsets to displace from the base.
We'll learn more about base-displacement in the very next section.