We've talked about base-displacement, that's the base plus a twelve bit displacement.
We've talked about long displacement, that's the base plus a 20-bit displacement, is time to learn about relative addressing.
Both base and long displacement use a modifier to the base address.
Well, relative addressing doesn't use a base address at all.
Get this, instructions that use relative addressing have 16- or 32-bit operands which represent a signed displacement from the address of the instruction being executed.
That signed displacement represents the number of halfwords before or after the instruction.
That means the effective address is always even.
It's always on a halfword boundary.
This is a graphical representation of the reach we have using relative addressing.
So we've got plus or minus 64 KB using the 16-bit relative addressing, plus or minus 4 GB using the 32-bit relative addressing.
These are both relative or in relation to the instruction being executed.
You can think of them as looking something like this.
There's a signed digit up front and notice these say RI.
That stands for Relative Immediate.
An operand that's Relative Immediate means it's the actual value, not the register or the memory reference for something.
Just like with long displacement, there are two versions of many instructions made specifically for use with relative addressing.
So there's Jump, jump long.
So right here, when we jump to Calc_Tax, it gets assembled to jump 103 Dog.
Why 103 Dog, you might ask? Because Two Charlie 080, (got that?) minus 2A006 equals 207A.
And because we're going by halfwords 207A/2 is 103 Dog.
It all makes sense though.
It is a little clunky, but we won't have to do it every time.
This is something that the Assembler will put together for us based on our labels, as you've probably figured out by this example.
So to recap, relative addressing doesn't use base registers.
It uses 16- or 32-bit displacements.
With 16-bit displacement having a 128 Kilobyte range, and 32-bit displacements having a 4 Gigabyte range.
Displacement units are measured in halfwords every two bytes on an even address boundary.
And displacements are relative to the instruction being executed.
And displacements are signed.
So we can go before or after the instruction.
Up next, we'll learn about operand addressing, and we'll look at some actual instruction formats.