In this section we will talk about RS and RX format instructions.
These are instructions where we've got a general register and some storage.
And when we got a general register and indexed storage, we'll talk about exactly what that means very shortly.
RS instructions occupy two halfwords, so in memory, they look like this.
There's the opcode upfront than the first operand, a register.
The second operand, the base address and the 12-bit displacement halfword.
And then our third operand is a register.
Now, you're probably wondering why the operands are in this order.
It's not this way in all types, but because we want everything to line up neatly than those boundaries.
In later examples, we'll see RS instructions where the third operand is not a register.
Before we look at the next example, we need to know how to specify the base displacement, operand in Assembler.
And, registers are easy, we just specify which one.
The Assembler logic for base-displacement logic is displacement, and then in parentheses, the base register.
An example, because we like examples, 255 bytes from the address at registered 10.
Here's our Assembler code.
In memory, that gets turned into this.
Able is our register, register 10.
Zero Fox Fox is 255.
How about another example for an RS instruction? Load Multiple.
Now, what Load Multiple does is it loads consecutive registers from consecutive fullwords in memory, one right after the other.
The Assembler mnemonic for this is LM.
The opcode is 98.
98.
So let's say we want to load registers 3, 4, 5, and 6 with the contents of four consecutive fullwords in memory.
And the first fullword is that displacement 28 from base register 13.
Our Assembler statement will look like this.
LM Load Multiple then 3 comma 6 (for 3 through 6), and then 28, parentheses, 13 (for 28 from register 13).
Just like that.
And, for completeness, here's how it will look in memory.
We'll start with the opcode, 98.
First operand, 3 (for register 3).
Third operand: register 6.
And then our second operand, the base and displacement.
Now, if this is starting to get a little bit weird, don't worry.
It is a little bit weird, but here's the thing.
We're covering this for completeness.
Most of the time we won't need to think about base addresses and displacements because we'll use symbols.
So if register 13 points to an area we've labeled "SAVEAREA", we can write code that's a lot more immediately meaningful, like this.
Up next, RX instructions: register and indexed instructions.
This is where it gets interesting because they're kind of like RS instructions, but with a fun little twist.
An RX instructions starts with our opcode, then our first operand.
Then our second operand has an extra register called the index.
Then as you can see, we've got our base and displacement.
Prior to index instructions we calculated the effective address by taking the base plus the displacement.
With index instructions, we take the base plus the displacement plus the index.
And these are meant for times when we want to iterate through a list of multiple items in a table or an array, or a list.
So the base register points to the array's start and then the index traverses through those items.
And if there's no index, it means...
no index.
Our syntax for this is: displacement and then parentheses, index register, comma, base register.
So if we start with 255(7,10) That says from register 7, with a displacement of 255 decimal, index number 7.
Alright? And then in memory it looks like this.
There's the opcode, register one, and then our index, and then the base, and then the displacement.
Let's do a little bit of addition.
The Add instruction adds a storage forward to a register and puts the result in the register.
The mnemonic is A or Able.
The opcode is Five Able.
If remember, we looked at another Add instruction before, but that was an RR, register to register instruction.
We need a different type of Add when we're using indexed data.
So if we want to add to register 3, the fullword at displacement 20 from register 5, then this is our instruction.
Note that we're not using the index, so we're just setting it to zero.
And it will end up looking like this in memory.
Opcode.
First operand, register 3, second operand, the index that's zero, and the second operand, the base-displacement.
In the next section, we'll start looking at SI and SS instructions.