Now that we know more about the Assembler syntax, we can see how the language is used to initialize storage.
This is similar though not entirely the same as the way we declare variables in other languages.
In this section, we'll learn how to define areas of storage with initial values using Define Constant or DC.
We'll also learn how to reserve an area of storage without any contents using the Define Storage or DS.
And we'll learn how to use a literals to define and represent data.
As you may have guessed, the Assembler instruction Define Constant or DC, reserves an area of storage with an initial value.
If you have experienced programming in another language, you may hear constant and make the assumption that we can't change this value after it's been defined.
That's actually not the case here.
It can be changed during program execution.
We'll be looking at how to use DC for binary integers, characters, hexadecimal digits, and bits.
For addresses and decimal, we'll cover those later on.
Let's start with those binary integers.
But first, a quick recap.
We know that binary integers can be halfwords, fullwords, or doublewords, with halfwords occupying 16 bits, that's two bytes, on a halfword boundary, or being at an even address.
Fullwords take up 32 bits, four bytes on a fullword boundary, that's a multiple of four.
Doublewords, occupy 64 bits, eight bytes, on a doubleword boundary, that's an address with a multiple of eight.
To define a binary halfword, we'll start with something like this.
DC, yep, H for halfword.
And then the decimal value in single quotes.
That will generate in memory the hex value of 0064.
Now, we want to get into the habit of setting labels for our data.
So let's look at this DC, with the Price label, I guess something costs $100.
Now, we can use the AH or Add Halfword instruction to add the second operand to the register and then place the result in the register.
That's just AH 3,Price See how easy that is.
We can also DC negative values.
Let's say we've got a discount value of negative five, a $5, off coupon.
Here's our DC statement with a label of Discount storing a halfword, negative five.
And down below, we can see that in memory.
Here's a few examples of binary integer fullwords.
For all of these, the values are placed at a fullword boundary, that's a multiple of four address.
Now, that last example there, you probably noticed there's a couple of spaces in here.
Assembler will ignore the spaces, but they're useful for making them human-readable.
It's easy to see that this is the thousands and this is the millions without those spaces, it would just be a long string of numbers and I know I can get lost in those.
So this can be really helpful for things like phone numbers, IP addresses, or anything where a grouping of digits can be helpful.
The third binary integer type is the doubleword, that's eight bytes on a doubleword boundary, (multiple of eight).
To define a doubleword, we use F with a type extension of D.
Why is that? If we use H for halfword and F for fullwords, why not D for doublewords? Let's investigate.
You'll find that many programs use type D to define a doubleword with all zeros, both D and FD result in a big string of zeros in memory.
So again, why not just use D instead of FD to define doubleword integers? Why not keep it consistent? Because it only works for zeros.
Type D defines a long floating point number, not a binary doubleword.
So a lot of programmers do a DC D'1' and expect it to load this into memory when it actually generates this.
That's the hexadecimal floating-point value of one.
And we'll get into the specifics of how that works later on.
But moral of the story, use FD, not D, to define binary integer doublewords.
We can modify the DC instruction with a duplication factor.
Duplication factor is also being the name of the techno grunge band that I played bass in.
Anyway, if we put that duplicates are in front of the data type, it will generate three halfwords in memory, one right after another, like this.
Worth noting though, the label always refers to the first of the repeated elements.
To refer to the second element, we could use Tab1+2 or for the third element, Tab1+4 If we set that duplication factor to zero, it won't generate any data, but it will force an alignment.
Normally the DC command requires a value.
The exception is when we set the duplication factor to zero for this very reason.
If we want to ensure doubleword alignment, we can use 0FD, or 0D because both have the same effect.
Speaking of alignment, let's look at how the Assembler aligns our fields.
Given a sequence of statements like this, the Assembler will produce a listing like this.
This is a simplified version of that listing that gets produced after a program is assembled.
In actuality, there are more than three columns, but these are the ones that we want to focus on for now.
Let's step through these columns starting with location.
The location is the position in our program where the Assembler places data or instructions.
The object code is what the Assembler generates from our source code.
And the source statement is a copy of our code.
So we don't need to read this to figure out what we're trying to do because it's already right here.
Now, all the fields here are naturally aligned.
The first field is a doubleword and it starts at zero, which is a valid doubleword boundary.
Second field is fullword, it starts at 8, which is a multiple of 4.
We're all good.
And the next two halfwords both start at even locations.
So, what luck? What happens when we're not quite so lucky though? Let's say we've got a halfword followed by a fullword and then another halfword, and then a doubleword.
In this order, they do not naturally fall along those boundaries.
Well, the Assembler will introduce gaps into the object code to ensure correct alignment.
Like this, we've got two extra bytes being inserted at location 2, and 6 extra bytes being inserted at location Able, those two extra bytes at 2 essentially push the start of the next field, the fullword, to 4.
And since 4 is a multiple of 4, (yeah, checks out), it now has the correct alignment.
Same for the six bytes at location A, which ensures that the final doubleword lands on an appropriate boundary.
We can also specify a field length when using DC.
It's the length modifier, indicated with an L, which goes after the type.
It's actually very unlikely that you'll need to specify the length for a binary integer as they have an implicit length, but we'll start with them just for completeness.
These all have the same result.
They define a one byte binary integer for the decimal value of 100, hexadecimal 64.
These examples show the definition of the same value, one, but with different lengths which modify a fullword.
And we can go past four if we want.
Really important to realize, however, is there is no alignment when L is present, so F is not the same as FL4.
F gets placed on a fullword boundary; FL4 gets placed at the next available location.
So just to summarize everything to define binary integers.
And we use the DC instruction with the halfword, fullword, or doubleword type.
We also learned that we can specify a value in decimal in single quotes if that makes more sense to us, we can also specify negative values and we can include spaces for readability's sake, though the Assembler will ignore them when turning them into Assembler code.
We learned all about that duplication factor and how the label for it refers to the first and the repeated fields.
Then when it's set to zero, a duplication factor generates no data, but it does ensure alignment.
The fields generated are aligned unless we specify an explicit length.
And that explicit length is rarely used when defining binary integers.
We know that the format for the Define Constant statement is DC.
Then over in the operand the duplication factor, which is optional.
Then the type, that's required.
The type extension, if needed, the length modifier, which is also optional, and then the value which is required unless it uses the duplication factor and the duplication factor is set to zero.
Following onto DC, Let's look at DS.
DS, short for Define Storage has the same syntax as DC.
And like DC, it forces alignment, which is pretty handy, but it doesn't fill the storage with initial values.
So if we start with these statements, it will produce a listing shown on the next slide.
The first field is H1, That's a halfword, and it occupies the first two bytes, making the next available location 2.
The next field is F1, and it needs to start on a fullword boundary and DS ensures that it does, which is why it starts at 4.
And the doubleword can start at eight because that's a multiple of eight.
In this code, we don't show the object code column because no object code is being generated.
It's simply assigning and aligning the space.
A few more quick examples.
We can see that DS accepts the same options as DC, including value.
And I can already hear you.
I thought DS doesn't write out any values.
Well, it's for documentation purposes only.
So it can be used if that helps make the code more readable, but it will ignore any values assigned there.
So probably best to just leave that blank to avoid confusion.
Alright, end of the lesson, we're done learning about binary integers.
In the next section, we'll see how to define character strings.