In this section, we'll learn about the steps required to assemble a program to run on z/OS.
This involves three steps, assembly, or what other languages referred to as compiling, linking, and execution.
Let's start with our assembly listing from the demo program.
That look familiar? On the right, there is our source program.
On the left, the generated object code, also called machine code.
A lot of people think that when you write Assembler, you're writing code that executes directly on the processor, but it's not quite that simple.
It's a low-level language, meaning that it's close to the processor as opposed to a high-level language like Python.
But we still need the Assembler to convert our source code into machine readable object code.
In actuality, there's something called a job step.
There are two inputs, the source program and what's called the macro library.
These go through the Assembler and output, the object module and the assembly listing.
Now we're familiar with these.
The source code goes to the Assembler and creates the object module and the assembly listing.
But what's up with that macro library? Assembler macros provide a compact notation for a group of statements.
So you only have to write one statement and Assembler will generate a group of statements.
They're most frequently used to interact with the operating system.
So e.g. to read from or write to files.
And if you think back to that Employee record example we showed before with the employee ID and the date of birth.
If we need that record and a lot of different programs, it's better to put it into a macro library and then reuse it that way than to re-code it each time.
That object code we generated through the Assembler isn't machine-readable despite it sometimes being called machine code.
We need one more step called linking.
A program called the Binder, formerly known as the Linkage Editor, reads the object code and produces a load module which is executable.
And just like the Assembler, it produces a listing.
Just like how the macro library works for source programs, the module library contains the object modules or load modules that the Binder can include in its output.
Many programs call other programs, they call their programs, functions, subroutines, or what the Assembler calls Control Sections.
The Binder detects this and reads the necessary modules from the module library than the final product is our object module combined with any other programs which it might need.
So here's an example.
We have a program, PROG1 which calls a subroutine called CALC1.
CALC1 is a control section that's previously been assembled and placed in the module library.
The Binder detects that PROG1 is calling CALC1.
So it reads it from the module library and combines it with PROG1 to make the output load module.
So when our program gets loaded into memory for execution, CALC1 is now also present.
The load module is usually written as a member of a partitioned data set, a PDS or PDSE.
That's kind of a way that data is organized on z/OS, kinda like a folder with files in it.
E.g. the Binder might write the DEMO1 program out to the PDSE, MY.LOADLIB.
So in order to run the program, we need this in our JCL pointing to that specific PDSE, specifying the program DEMO1.
The STEPLIB is then used to tell the system where to find the program.
z/OS has a number of JCL stored procedures to assemble, link, and run programs.
They are ASMAC which is used to compile a program.
The C in there is for compile.
Then there's ASMACL, which is used to assemble and link a program.
That's the L.
We can use that to place the load module into a PDSE for later use.
And then there's ASMACLG, which is used to assemble, link and run a program.
The G stands for go.
No, really.
So we use this when we want to assemble link and run a program in a single job.
This is the JCL we might use to assemble link and run our DEMO1 program.
And we can see the compile step right here.
And the star means the data is what follows below.
So here's our DEMO1 program from CSECT to END.
So when we actually run our job, this is what we'll see in our job log.
We'll see if return code zeros for the compile and the link steps and the condition code of 10 for our actual program, because that's what the program does.
Since that's pretty much all it does.
So here we are.
We've learned about all the major elements that go into writing an Assembler program for z/Architecture.
And we've learned how to use JCL to compile, link and run it.
Obviously, there's a lot more to learn and we can only get so far without getting our hands on an actual system.
So make sure to follow up on this course.
But the ones that will follow, we'll be doing labs, working on examples and putting together code very similar to what you might encounter on a real live IBM z/OS system.
But for now, you have the fundamentals covered.
And you should feel good about that.
Whether you came in as a newbie programmer or as someone with a background in Python, C, or even another type of assembler, you now have what it takes to tackle Assembler with a solid foundational understanding.
Thank you so much for taking this course.
I hope you had a great time.
Keep up the great work.