I know we're all really excited to dive into Assembler code, writing programs, working with data, all that fun stuff.
But before we can do much of anything, we really need to cover basic numbering systems.
And don't worry, this isn't going to require a mathematics degree, are learning calculus all over again.
It's just a while.
We tend to think of numbers as being base ten, where once you get to ten in a digit, you increment the next higher-order digit and then sit that digit back to zero.
Computers, at least most of them operate in binary, either a one or a zero.
That's certainly a very logical method of operating everything either is or isn't.
But to make things a little more compact and easier for us to work with, binary has a close cousin, hexadecimal.
So in this section we'll talk about numbering systems in general and how binary and hexadecimal or simply hex all interrelate.
So you're probably pretty familiar with decimal numbers.
There's ten digits, zero through 9, 10 is the base.
And numbers can be represented by using powers of the base.
So the number 1235 or 1,235 is made up of 1 thousand, 2 hundreds, and 35 or 3 tens and 5 ones.
Put another way, 1 times 10 to the third for the thousands, 2 times 10 to the second for the hundreds, 3 times 10 to the one, or just 10, and 5 times 10 to the zeroth power, or just 5 times 1.
As we mentioned before, computers store numbers in binary, so it's all ones and zeros and we can think of this as being a base two number system and we can work with numbers by using powers of two.
So consider the number 1010011 in binary.
How do we translate that into decimal? We start from the right side with one times two to the zeroth, then one times two to the first, and then zero times two to the second.
And then zero times two to the third.
One times two to the fourth, zero times two to the fifth, and one times two to the sixth.
Now, we've got to add up all these values.
And thankfully, there's no need to add up anything multiplied by zero because it's zero.
So let's just find the ones where there's a one that's two to the sixth, that's 64.
2 to the fourth, that's 16.
2 to the first, that's 2.
2 to the zeroth is just 1.
That gives us 83.
Now, you won't need to do these types of calculations in your head every time for the bigger values, you'll use a converter or a calculator.
For the numbers that come up a lot, you'll just learn their equivalents just by working with them again and again and again and again.
Now, the problem with binary is that as you can see, a fairly simple number takes up a whole lot of space.
We did all that work to wind up with 83.
83.
It's kinda anticlimactic.
If you asked me, if we want a big number like that, 1,235 from the decimal example, we'd wind up with 1001 1010 011.
That's 11 digits.
For three decimals.
Computers have memory, they have to be considered Of we have our own memory, but also just the time it takes to get through all those syllables.
In binary.
That's just too much.
I've got other things to do today.
And what genius decided that zero should get two syllables anyway.
Come on.
Clearly, we need a new way to address a binary data that's also a little more compact.
Enter hexadecimal.
In hexadecimal, we use 16 digits instead of ten or two.
So we'll use zero through nine to represent zero through nine, and A through F to represent 10 through 15.
In other words, after nine comes A and we won't rollover and increment the next column until we've hit F.
So if we see 24A, that's two times 16 to the second, got that, plus four times 16, plus 10.
10 because A is what comes after 9 and in decimal, ten comes after nine.
That all make sense.
So we've got 512 plus 64 plus 10, or 586.
And by the way, sometimes when you hear me reading off hex digits, I'll use the phonetic version that a lot of people have adopted.
So instead of A, B, C, D, E, F, I'll say Able, Baker, Charlie, Dog, Easy, Fox.
This is just good practice because when you're reading off digits to someone over the phone or on a noisy test floor.
A can sound a lot like eight.
And BCDE can kind of blend together and maybe sound like a three.
So when I see 24A, I'll probably read it as Two Four Able or 24 Able.
I'm pointing that out because I learned hexadecimal from a book that didn't mention this.
The first time I heard people talking about bakers dogs and foxes.
It really confused me and I don't want you to be as confused as I was.
Now, the good thing about hexadecimal is that we can represent four binary digits in a single hexadecimal digit, no wasted space.
So any combination of binary bits, there's a hexadecimal digit for that.
When we simply convert to decimal, will eventually wind up needing that second column and will need to go up to 15.
Hexadecimal is far more efficient here.
Let's consider our old friend, 1,235.
1001 1010 011.
Now, I need to take a nap.
That felt like 5 hours.
What we can do is take that binary representation and break it into groups of four digits and we'll append a zero at the beginning, just so it's 12 digits, a multiple of four and not 11 digits.
Now we've got 0100 because we've put the one in the beginning, 1101 and 0011.
That's Four Dog Three.
I know that because I've been working with hex for awhile, but there's also a table we had on that last chart.
And eventually you won't even need to look it up either.
That's three digits in hex for some than it took four digits in decimal and 11 in binary.
So suffice to say, computers will keep working in binary, humans will keep working in decimal.
But when a human needs to talk to a computer, there's a good chance we'll be doing it in hexadecimal.
In the next video, we'll convert a decimal number to hexadecimal.