In this section, we're going to convert a number from decimal to hexadecimal.
And we're going to do it a little bit differently than before.
We're going to start with the decimal number n and then divide it by 16, giving Q, the quotient and R, the remainder, so R, the remainder, will always be a digit from 0 to 15.
See where this is going? R becomes the rightmost hexadecimal digit, or at least the digit to the left of the last digit we processed.
Since we're going to keep doing this until we run out of numbers.
And we'll take the remainder value and replace it with the hex value.
So 10 becomes Able, 11 becomes Baker, and so on.
When , our quotient, becomes zero, we stop.
When it's not zero.
We make our number the quotient and continue, keep dividing it by 16.
So let's take 6,823.
6, 8, 2, 3.
Let's tackle this step-by-step.
First, we divide the whole thing by 16 and then we get 426 with a remainder of seven.
Let's put that seven over here down in the right-most digit, and seven is less than ten.
No need to convert it.
Then we take that remainder, 426.
Make that our number, divide that by 16.
Quotient of 26, remainder of 10.
Take the 10.
That converts to A or Able, slide it down here and we keep going with the remainder.
26/16, that's 1 with a remainder of 10.
So that 10 also becomes Able, A.
There's really no need to do this, but 1/16 is 0 with a remainder of 1.
The 1 goes down here and we get a 0 for the quotient, so we stop, making our hexadecimal conversion of 6823: One Able, Able, Seven.
So, 6823 is the number we might present in a form to a user.
If we're looking at a readout of computer data in hex, we would see 1AA7, One Able, Able Seven.
If we need to go from decimal to binary, it's oftentimes easier to go hexadecimal first and then just map those digits with the four binary digits.
It represents.
I know that's nothing that seems particularly easy or natural right now, but I want to make sure you get all the connections between all these numbers systems in mind because it will definitely come in handy later on.
In the next section, we'll start doing some basic arithmetic.