A program is almost definitely going to use offsets to refer to data or instructions in memory.
This mechanism is called base-displacement addressing, and it's what we'll be covering here.
We start with a general register pointing to an area in memory.
This becomes our base register, and the contents of that location becomes the base address.
And this might be the program's starting address.
The instructions, or operand is calculated as the base address plus that 12 bit offset, the displacement.
Therefore, the calculated address, that's the base plus the displacement, is what's known as the effective address.
When we're looking at an instruction, the base and displacement are encoded as a halfword, specifically called the addressing halfword.
We've got four bits for the register.
That's zero through Fox or decimal zero through 15.
And that's in the B section for Base.
And then we have 12 bits for the displacement 000 through Fox, Fox, Fox, or decimal zero through 4,096.
That's the D section over here.
If you're new to Assembler, this might sound overly complicated, but using base displacement addressing solves two important problems.
One, it lets us encode the address using 16 bits instead of 64.
And 2, the programs will work anywhere regardless of its location in memory.
All the registers can be used as a base register except for register zero.
Actually, register zero is never a base register.
And if register zero is specified, the base address becomes zero regardless of what's in register zero and the effective address becomes whatever the displacement is.
That was a lot of words.
How about a couple of examples? Let's say register seven contains Two Able Zero Zeros Zero, and our base-displacement is Zero Charlie Zero.
An instruction might come in with the operand looking like this, Seven Zero Charlie Zero.
So whatever we're doing, we'll want to start with the address in register seven plus the offset Two Able Zero Zero Zero, plus Zero Charlie Zero, equals...
this is simply Two Able Zero Charlie Zero.
That becomes our effective address.
How about one more example? Same thing as before, but register seven contains Seven Eight Zero Zero Zero.
Displacement is still Zero Charlie Zero.
So if the operand is Seven Zero Charlie Zero, we're adding the base to the displacement and we get Seven Eight Zero Charlie Zero.
Let's switch things up a little bit for our next example, because I think you've got this down.
We've got register zero with this value in it.
And the operand looks like this.
So our offset is One Able Eight.
The effective address is, well, the effective address is the same as the offset because when register zero is used, its contents are ignored and the effective address becomes whatever the displacement is.
That was a bit of a trick question, but it's also important to remember the unique way that register zero works.
Let's get back to our program for the fourth example.
Register 12 gets loaded with the program's starting address Two Able Zero Zero Zero.
Then we get an instruction to branch to Calc_Tax, which has an offset of 080.
If the operand is Charlie 080 and the opcode is a branch, that's like a jump to statement.
We'll take the contents of register 12 or C (Charlie), which is Two Able Zero Zero Zero.
Add that to the offset 080, making our effective address Two Able 080.
Perhaps most important thing to realize here is that we never need to calculate displacement manually.
Our programs are really just doing what's written in this box here, although we'll get into the actual syntax in a bit.
Once we write up the structure, the Assembler will write the actual instructions for us.
In summary, base displacement addressing provides a compact way of representing operand addresses in just 16 bits and providing for location independent instructions.
It's been around since the first mainframes, the S/360, which is the first ancestor of today's modern z/Architecture systems.
It's not without its limitations though, which is something we'll get into in the next section.