In this section we'll be talking about instructions.
What do we know about instructions so far? Well, we know that program instructions reside in memory.
We know that the PSW contains the addresses of the next instruction in the IA or the Instruction Address field.
We know that the CPU picks the instruction for execution from the IA field and then load the next instruction into the IA field.
We also know that if there's a branch or a jump, the branch target is loaded onto the IA and becomes the next instruction to be executed.
So what are these instructions look like? Well, instructions are 1, 2 or 3 halfwords in length and always start on a halfword boundary, so, an even address.
Instructions start with an operation code, often called an opcode, followed by operands.
Those operands can be registers, memory addresses or immediates, where the operant is the value to be used itself, not the address of the data or a reference to it.
Next, we'll learn about the instruction formats which are classified based on operand types.
Now, a little bit of perspective here, the original System/360 architecture had five instruction formats and the good news is, we can still use them today.
The formats refer to the operands in the instruction so, the first one, RR, stands for register and register.
We're gonna be doing something that uses two registers.
And then there's RS, register and storage.
So that's an instruction that's operating on a register and something in storage.
From there, there's RX: register and indexed storage (more on that in a bit).
And then we've got SI for storage and immediate and SS for storage and storage.
As the architecture evolved, more instructions and more instruction formats got added and we're up to 30 now, though, most of them are variations on the original five.
Also, the original formats used a 12-bit base displacement.
We'll be looking at two additional formats to show the use of long and relative addressing, as well as some other formats that we'll be needing.
So we learned about long and relative addressing earlier.
Here's two formats that use them: RXY is register and storage, where one operand is a register and one is a long displacement address.
Then there's RI, register and immediate, where one operand is a register and one is a 16-bit relative address.
Let's go back to that RR-type instruction.
So we've got two registers.
RR instructions occupy one halfword.
In memory, they look like this: there's the opcode and there's our two registers.
So we've been looking at types of instructions.
Let's look at an actual instruction.
Add Register.
Add Register adds two registers together and puts the result in the first register.
Now, each opcode has a mnemonic, a way of remembering it.
Add Register's is AR.
How convenient! So if we wanted to add register 14 to register 2, it would look something like this.
There's our opcode and our two registers.
And we also said add register 14 to register 2.
That order is important.
It's important to notice that typically the data moves from right to left in Assembler.
So register 14 is on the right and register two is on the left.
Ar is the mnemonic, the actual opcode for it is 1A, One Able.
So once we take the opcode and the hex version of our registers, this is what our instruction will look like in memory after compiling or assembling our program: One Able Two Easy.
ADD register 14 to register 2.
How about another example? Subtract Register.
The mnemonic here is SR, opcode is One Baker.
So the statement subtracts register 12 from register 8.
That instruction becomes SR 8,12 and in memory that becomes One Baker Eight Charlie.
In the next section, we'll look at RS instructions, where we've got a general register and storage.