In this section we'll be covering RXY and RI instructions.
RXY: one register, one long displacement address.
Let's get this.
These occupy three halfwords and the structure is slightly more complicated.
So we'll approach it in two stages.
This has an opcode and an operation mode, and they're located at opposite ends of the instruction, both eight bytes.
The first operand, the register, comes after the opcode upfront.
That leaves us with the second operand.
Let's look at that.
This should look fairly similar to the long displacement that we saw in the last unit, except it also has an index register.
So there's the index, the base, the displacement low, and the displacement high.
Altogether, here's the super crowded picture and now you can see why we wanted to do this in two stages.
Apart from having a long displacement operand RXY instructions behave just like RX instructions.
In fact, if we look at them like this, we can see that the first four bytes are actually the same.
It's just the extra bits that make it an RXY instruction.
That's what makes it different.
And we've seen the Add instruction in both RR and RX formats.
How about in the RXY format? Gotta collect them ll, right? Our mnemonic is AY, the Y indicating long.
And our opcode is E35A.
That's a longer opcode than we're used to seeing.
That's an extended opcode with the second half there, that's our mode.
So if we want to add to register 3 the fullword at displacement 20,000 from register 5.
We won't be able to use the RX type Add because the displacement exceeds 4095 bytes.
But the Assembler source statement is going to be very similar to our RX example.
It'll be AY 3,20000, and then in parentheses, (0,5) because we're not using the index, just like in the RX example.
And in memory, we break that operation code out to the beginning and the end again.
Our first operand is the register, that's 3.
Second operand is the base and index that's registered 5 with an index of zero.
And then the displacement low.
And then here's the displacement high.
Finally, we made it to the RI instruction format for when one operand is a register and one is a 16-bit relative address.
RI instructions occupied two halfwords and the second operand is an immediate value.
There are three variants of the RI instructions.
And for right now, we're just going to focus on the type where the immediate value is a relative address.
The other two will look at as needed.
Let's get a look at that instruction format.
You can see the RI instructions have an extended 12-bit operation code.
Not quite as drastic as the RXY instructions but still split apart like that.
Then we've got this concept of a four bit mask, which controls the instruction operation.
I know more on that in a bit.
As we mentioned a few seconds ago, the second operand is a signed displacement, which is the number of halfwords from the instruction itself.
We've briefly mentioned the jump command before.
It's a form of the branch command that uses relative addressing instead of base displacement.
It's mnemonic, is J, opcode A74.
And notice its 12-bit extended opcode there.
Let's see it from another angle.
So if we wanted to jump to the instruction at 8,000 bytes from this one, this very instruction, the Assembler source statement is simply J, star or asterisk, plus 8000.
The star means here or this location.
In memory, it looks like this with the opcode upfront and over here with the four bitmask in the middle and the second operand, the relative immediate address at the end.
The relative address will get calculated by the Assembler.
But just for completeness, if we take 8,000 bytes divided in half because we're talking about halfwords here.
That's 4,000 halfwords.
And 4,000 decimal is 0FA0 in hex.
That is our relative address.
And that concludes the introduction to the elements of the IBM z architecture which an Assembler application programmer is going to work with.
Now, I'm fully aware that that felt like a lot.
And yet somehow it's not the complete picture.
Remember, we're trying to build up that foundation, which we can then build upon.
So we'll be learning more elements as we go on.
But if you're feeling good right now, you should keep feeling good.
And if you're still a little fuzzy about some areas, test yourself with the quizzes.
Go back and look at the instruction formats and their examples.
And it will all start to come together, I promise.
In the next section, we'll get into the rules of the Assembler language.